Computers are wonderful machines. While most machines (cars, television
sets, microwaves) have a specific purpose which they excel at
accomplishing, computers are purposeless machines that can be taught to
accomplish anything. The power to make a computer do your bidding is
called "programming."

Nowadays, in any scientific and professional endeavor, people have to
deal with large volumes of data. Those who are able to leverage the
power of computers to make use of such data, i.e., those who can
program, are far better able to do their jobs than those who are not. In
fact, it can be argued that in the very near future, those who do not
possess programming skills will become unemployable. Therefore, I feel
that it is necessary for anyone to acquire basic skills in this area
during their education.

Being able to write computer programs not only entails knowing what
specific code statements mean and do; it also entails having the ability
think like a programmer, and to analyze problems from the perspective of
solving them with a computer program. Such skills cannot be learned from
a book, they can only be learned by actually creating programs.

This book has been designed to teach the basics of the Python 3 computer
language. Students will not only learn to use the language, but also do
their first practical exercises with it.

The book is not only catering towards people who are naturally inclined
towards programming. It is meant to also be used by those who have no
particular aptitude for programming. This is exemplified by texts which
try to be extensive and foresee problems that might arise when trying to
understand certain concepts.
