Computational technology causes the world to change rapidly.

Almost 30 years ago I got my first job as a computer programmer. At the
time, only larger companies with a big administrative overload used
computers. Or rather, "a computer," because it was rare for a company to
have more than one. There were no personal computers, no Internet, no
mobile phones. People still used typewriters.

In those 30 years, the way people work and live has undergone huge
changes. That is exceptionally clear when looking at the kind of work
that people do. Mailmen, for instance, delivered the mail twice per day
when I was a kid – now they deliver mail twice per week, which means
that the contingent of professional mailmen has been decimated. Bank
offices are closed because banking can be done much easier online.
Information desks can be manned by digital avatars or be replaced by
online information systems. Large department stores go out of business
because people make their purchases online, leading to an enormous
decline in the need for having salespeople. And though this has
currently caused a small increase in the demand for people who work in
transportation, we can see self-driving cars on the horizon, replacing
the need to have any chauffeurs at all.

These are all "low profile" jobs, but "high profile" jobs aren’t safe
either. I have taught programming to professional journalists, who told
me that computers are taking over large parts of their jobs, writing
basic articles and doing automated background research – they wanted to
take my courses because they realized that without skills in digital
technology, they would be out of a job in a few years time. Programs
have been developed that take over a menial but oh-so time consuming
part of lawyers’ jobs, namely researching case histories. Computers can
write music, produce paintings, and even sculpt – why would you have
someone hammer away at a block of granite for six months when a
3D-printer can produce a sculpture with a few hours of work? Even
designing and running scientific experiments has been offloaded to
computers in some research domains.

In the 30 years in which I have been a professional worker, I have seen
the job market change from hardly incorporating computers at all, to a
situation in which the need for human employees has been reduced
considerably – regardless the job. And that change has not come to an
end yet.

This does not mean that there is no place for humans in the job market.
It does mean, however, that only humans who can make contributions that
a computer has a hard time making on its own, can be assured of a job.
In the near future, employability will be invariably linked to the
ability to integrate the power of humans and computers in a way that
enhances both of them.

The problem is that to be able to use computers to improve the quality
of one’s work, it does not suffice to be able to use a word processor or
spreadsheet. One should actually be able to expand the capabilities of
computers from the perspective of one’s chosen profession. For example,
a journalist who can only run a fact-finding computer program that
someone else wrote, is not needed. However, a journalist who is able to
expand a fact-finding program so that it can come up with facts from new
sources, is an asset.

To be able to employ computers in such a way, one needs the skills to
think and solve problems like a computer programmer. Having taught
students computer programming for many years, I know that this does not
come naturally to most. To acquire the necessary skills, students need
to spend several intensive courses on the topic.

Considering the fact that universities and colleges are supposed to
prepare students for the job market in which they have to function for
40 or more years, and considering the fact that in the very near future
(if not right now already) the ability to incorporate the power of
computers in any job is a necessity to being a valued worker, one would
expect that "computer programming" is one of the basic courses that any
student needs to take. Unfortunately, it is not. Typically, basic
required courses are "scientific writing," "philosophy of science," and
"statistics," but "computer programming" is still seen, by most
education programs, as an optional skill. It is not.

In my view, any course program that does not make "computer programming"
a required course, is doing its students a disservice, as it is not
preparing them for the job market. Actually, I would prefer it if
secondary, or even primary schools would incorporate such courses, as
programming skills tend to be easier to learn at a younger age. The
reason is that they need a particular way of creative thinking, which is
harder to acquire when one is already used to solving problems in the
reproductive ways that are normally taught at schools.

All students, regardless of their chosen topic, need to learn how to
program. Not because we should raise a generation of computer
programmers – professional programming is a specialization that only a
few people need to be able to do. But the ability to create programs
provides students with the skills to think and solve problems like a
computer programmer, to gain insight in the possibilities and
limitations of computers, and to leverage the power of computers in a
particular domain in a uniquely human way.

The goal of this book is to teach anyone how to create useful programs
in Python. It should be usable by secondary school students, and
university and college students for whom computer programming is not
naturally incorporated in their course program. Its aim is to give
anyone the means to become proficient in programming, and as such get
prepared to perform well in the 21st century job market.

Pieter Spronck  
May 2, 2016  
Maastricht, The Netherlands

Pieter Spronck is a Professor of Computer Science at Tilburg University,
The Netherlands.
